README.md, before:

# August 🪓

**August** is an assembler written in [Ink](https://dotink.co/). It currently aims to support assembling and statically linking ELF executables for ARM, RISC-V, and x86_64 architectures, though Mach-O support for ARM and x86_64 are possible. In the long term, August aims to be the compiler backend for a native, self-hosting Ink compiler toolchain based on [September](https://github.com/thesephist/september).

_August is ⚠️ under development ⚠️. Most parts of the system do not work at all yet._

## Design

August is an assembler and linker. The two halves are independent but designed to work together as a system. In both parts, August aims to be simple and spec-compliant wherever possible, perhaps at the cost of efficiency.

### Assembler

The August assembler is a pure function mapping an assembly program to a single ELF object file. It supports Intel-syntax assembly for x86 and takes after Nasm in syntax.

_more to come._

### ELF Linker

The August linker is a pure function mapping a set of (ELF, for now) object files into a single statically linked ELF executable.

_more to come._

## Progress to date

Currently, there is no distinction of the assembler and linker in August. `./src/cli.ink` emits a hard-coded minimal ELF binary constructed from pieces in the assembler. I'm still learning about the ELF format.

The ELF generated by the ELF library in August currently makes use of three sections:

- `.text` containing the program text, i.e. translated x64 assembly. The asm translator is currently under development.
- `.rodata` containing read-only data loaded into process memory as RW
- `.shstrtab` containing section headers

The content of text and rodata sections can be provided to the ELF library, which will return a fully linked ELF binary as the result.

## References and further reading

The ELF file format is quite well documented, especially in source bases of various linkers, assemblers, and kernels, but the available reference material for _implementing_ an ELF linker is not...what you would call super accessible. In the process of building August, I've found the following references particularly helpful.

- [`man elf` on Linux](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man5/elf.5.html) and the `elf` header file in the kernel sources, which provide the canonical reference for implementations of ELF files
- [A Whirlwind Tutorial on Creating Really Teensy ELF Executables for Linux](http://www.muppetlabs.com/~breadbox/software/tiny/teensy.html), which breaks down the ELF format for executable files at a high evel
- [LWN's write-up of the Linux kernel's view of ELF executables](https://lwn.net/Articles/631631/), with another breakdown of ELF executables
- [Solaris's documentation on ELF object files](https://docs.oracle.com/cd/E53394_01/html/E54813/chapter6-93046.html#scrolltoc), a good in-depth reference
- [Notes on the ELF specification](http://www.muppetlabs.com/~breadbox/software/ELF.txt), which is long but very, very comprehensive, occasionally useful for studying edge cases

Commit message:

docs: update README with asm resources and dev notes

README.md, after:

# August 🪓

**August** is an assembler written in [Ink](https://dotink.co/). It currently aims to support assembling and statically linking ELF executables for ARM, RISC-V, and x86_64 architectures, though Mach-O support for ARM and x86_64 are possible. In the long term, August aims to be the compiler backend for a native, self-hosting Ink compiler toolchain based on [September](https://github.com/thesephist/september).

_August is ⚠️ under development ⚠️. Most parts of the system do not work at all yet._

## Design

August is an assembler and linker. The two halves are independent but designed to work together as a system. In both parts, August aims to be simple and spec-compliant wherever possible, perhaps at the cost of efficiency.

### Assembler

The August assembler is a pure function mapping an assembly program to a single ELF object file. It supports Intel-syntax assembly for x86 and takes after Nasm in syntax.

_more to come._

### ELF Linker

The August linker is a pure function mapping a set of (ELF, for now) object files into a single statically linked ELF executable.

_more to come._

## Progress to date

Currently, there is no distinction of the assembler and linker in August. `./src/cli.ink` emits a hard-coded minimal ELF binary constructed from pieces in the assembler. I'm still learning about the ELF format.

The ELF generated by the ELF library in August currently makes use of three sections:

- `.text` containing the program text, i.e. translated x64 assembly. The asm translator is currently under development.
- `.rodata` containing read-only data loaded into process memory as RW
- `.shstrtab` containing section headers

The content of text and rodata sections can be provided to the ELF library, which will return a fully linked ELF binary as the result.

## References and further reading

The ELF file format is quite well documented, especially in source bases of various linkers, assemblers, and kernels, but the available reference material for _implementing_ an ELF linker is not...what you would call super accessible. In the process of building August, I've found the following references particularly helpful.

- [`man elf` on Linux](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man5/elf.5.html) and the `elf` header file in the kernel sources, which provide the canonical reference for implementations of ELF files
- [A Whirlwind Tutorial on Creating Really Teensy ELF Executables for Linux](http://www.muppetlabs.com/~breadbox/software/tiny/teensy.html), which breaks down the ELF format for executable files at a high level
- [LWN's write-up of the Linux kernel's view of ELF executables](https://lwn.net/Articles/631631/), with another breakdown of ELF executables
- [Solaris's documentation on ELF object files](https://docs.oracle.com/cd/E53394_01/html/E54813/chapter6-93046.html#scrolltoc), a good in-depth reference
- [Notes on the ELF specification](http://www.muppetlabs.com/~breadbox/software/ELF.txt), which is long but very, very comprehensive, occasionally useful for studying edge cases

In writing an x86/x64 assembler, the following were especially helpful to get me up to speed.

- [The x86asm.net ISA reference](http://ref.x86asm.net/coder64.html), which is comprehensive enough for a toy assembler and easy to navigate once you get used to the compact notation
- [Encoding x86 Instructions](http://www.cs.loyola.edu/~binkley/371/Encoding_Real_x86_Instructions.html), which was a helpful guide to understanding how x86 and x64 instructions are encoded
- The [x64 cheat sheet](http://cs.brown.edu/courses/cs033/docs/guides/x64_cheatsheet.pdf) for a handy list of the core x86/x64 instruction set

## Development

To work on August, you obviously need [Ink](https://dotink.co/) installed. [Inkfmt](https://github.com/thesephist/inkfmt) is also useful for auto-formatting code, which you can run with `make format` or `make f`.

When I work on August (especially the assembler), I usually have two other panes open, running:

- `ls src/*.ink | entr -cr make` so every file change assembles and runs a program to test
- `ls ./b.out | entr -cr objdump -d -Mintel ./b.out` so that every time the executable is re-compiled, I can see the disassembly of the executable and check it against the intended assmbly code.
